00:00
00:01 Hi.
00:02 I'm going to be talking about Firebase Data Connect and specifically the internal implementation of the query manager in the Kotlin Android SDK.
00:15 So, I'm going to go over the specifications and the requirements, and your job as an AI agent is to turn this into a specification document as requested.
00:29 So Firebase Data Connect is an Android library that provides access to a PostgreSQL database which is hosted in a Google Cloud instance. It's an official project of Google and it uses gRPC as the protocol for connecting with the backend.
00:58 The protocol is a bidirectional streaming protocol. This bidirectional streaming protocol provides fully duplex communication and all queries and mutations occur over this single stream. Queries and mutations get registered with it.
01:27 So, there are three main operations. The first operation is to execute a query. This will send a message to the backend which will run a query against the PostgreSQL database and return the results, and it's a request-response sort of style of communication.
01:50 The second operation is execute mutation. And with the execute mutation RPC, it will perform an insert, update, or delete on the PostgreSQL database. It can also do a combination of deletes and updates, but it's always some sort of mutation to the data in the database. That, like the execute query RPC, is a request-response sort of thing where the client will send a request to execute a mutation and the response will come back and that's the end of that communication for that operation.
02:32 The final and third RPC defined is subscribe. Now the subscribe RPC is different in that it's a long-lived connection. The client will send a request, very similar to execute query, it will send a request to the backend to subscribe to a query and the backend will immediately reply with the results of that query. But then, it will periodically send new results for the query as the data in the database updates.
03:07 So the client just listens for a long time waiting for responses to come back. Then when the client or other clients or however the data gets changed in the database, the server will automatically push the new results down to the client through this bidirectional stream.
03:32 The stream can multiplex multiple subscriptions and one-off execute query and execute response requests. Each request sent by the client has a corresponding request ID and that ID will be attached to the results that come back from the server, allowing the client to determine which request a given response is tied to.
03:59 So in the example of a subscription, we can over the course of time get one to many responses for a subscription. One final sort of RPC or... it's the same RPC as subscribe, but one final message that can be sent is what's called a resume request. And this just prompts the backend to send the most recent results for an active subscription.
04:30 Sometimes the client results can be out of date, such as for example if the database is updated directly outside of Data Connect, the backend will not know that there's been a mutation and so the resume can be used to get the latest results. Which is also useful if the client disconnects and has to reconnect and then it can immediately send a resume request to ask for the most recent updates from the backend.
05:01 Okay. Now on the client SDK, there is also a normalized query cache. The query results that come from the backend can have entity IDs attached to them. So by default, or sorry, the client SDK first of all can be configured with a local cache. It is optional.
05:30 So if the client has no local cache, then it will always just run the query against the backend. If it does have a local cache, then when query results are received for a specific query, it will save them in the local database and later requests can return results from cache depending on the configuration.
05:56 The cache is normalized, which in this case means that the results can have entities in them. An entity being an object, basically a dictionary with key-value pairs, and some of the values can correspond to rows in the database and we call those rows entities.
06:21 And if the response comes back with an entity ID, then the cache will extract those entities from the response and store them in their own table in the local cache. And then when query results are requested from cache, the cache mechanism will reassemble the original response from the extracted entities.
06:48 This is useful because if say you run two queries that return the same entity and one of those queries or the query that's run second gets newer results, then it will update the entity in the database and both of the queries, both of their results from cache will reflect those updated values because they both restore the query result from the entities and the latest version of the entity will be stored in cache.
07:18 So, as I mentioned before, the Data Connect SDK can be configured with a local cache or without a local cache. And as the name implies, without a local cache, the query results are just served immediately to the caller without being persisted anywhere.
07:42 In contrast, if caching is configured, then the query results are saved in the local cache and returned. Now when a query is executed, it can be executed in one of three modes. The first mode is called cache only, the second mode is called server only, and the third mode is called prefer cache.
08:15 Okay, let's talk about cache only first. When a query is run in cache only mode, then the query will be served from local cache. It will not make any connections to the backend. If the query, if no results for the query are present in cache, then a cache query results not found exception will be thrown.
08:44 Similarly, if caching is not configured, if the Data Connect SDK is not configured to use local caching, cache only queries will fail in exactly the same manner because there is no local cache from which to retrieve results.
08:58 However, if there are results for the query in the cache, then the response will be assembled from the cache. It'll first read the query results and the query results will reference zero or many entities that need to be grafted into the response tree, and it will retrieve those entities, graft them in, and return the results to the caller. All without having to hit any remote servers. This can work just fine offline.
09:31 The second parameter is called server only. And as its name implies, when a server only query is executed, it will completely ignore the local cache and will go straight to the backend and request the results from the backend.
09:52 If the device is offline or for some other reason cannot connect to the backend, then an exception will be thrown indicating such. However, if the backend is reachable and returns a response, then that response will be returned to the caller. And if the local caching is configured, then that server response will be saved into the local cache, again extracting the entities into their own entity table.
10:23 The final mode, called prefer cache, is a combination of the two. Now I haven't mentioned this yet, but each time cache data is returned from the server, it has an associated max age, maximum age, which is typically hours or days, how long the cache data is valid for.
10:48 So when prefer cache is executed, it first looks in the local cache. If it does not find data in the local cache, then it gets results from the server just like a server only query. If it does find data in the local cache, then it checks the maximum age. And if the age of that data has expired, then it also goes to the server and gets new results just like server only.
11:18 However, if the data in the cache is present in the cache and is within the maximum age, then that data is returned for the query without any need to connect to the backend.
11:34 Okay, so that's the three query modes. Now for query subscriptions, when a query is subscribed to, the first thing it will do, the SDK will do, is check the local cache. If there is a query result in the local cache, then it will immediately return those results to the subscription as the first result.
11:58 If not, then it creates a subscription with the backend through gRPC. And once it gets results from the backend, it will then publish new query results from the backend. And those query results are published to the caller using Kotlin flows, that's Kotlin coroutine flow, regardless of whether or not the initial response was served from cache.
12:33 And every time an update comes from the backend, the local cache is updated with those results.
12:47 Now, so basically for any query, just to summarize, the query results can come from one of three places. Either the local cache, it can come from an explicit execute query RPC sent to the backend, or it can come from a response from a query subscription.
13:16 Now one, let's change gears a little bit. One very strong requirement for this SDK is to de-duplicate work and reuse objects in memory as much as possible. This reduces the amount of memory consumed by the SDK and also reduces work by, if the same query is executed twice, then it is simply only actually executed once and the results from that one execution are fanned out to all the interested parties.
13:55 Now each query is uniquely identified by three pieces of information. First is the authentication UID, this is the user ID which may be null if there's no user logged in. The second piece of data is the operation name, each query has an operation name which is a short string. And the third piece of information is the query's variables.
14:27 So a given query can have different variables that affect how it executes. For example, you could have a query whose operation name is get user by ID and the variables would contain the ID of the user whose information to return. So those three pieces of information uniquely identify a query, at least from the aspect of the backend.
14:51 Now locally, there's a few more pieces of information that uniquely identify a query. There is the data deserialization objects. So the backend returns to us an untyped map with key-value pairs, potentially nested.
15:19 And the Android SDK uses the Kotlinx serialization library, the official library, to convert these raw maps into higher-level Kotlin data classes. And a query can in theory, although it's uncommon, a query can be run with different deserialization objects.
15:47 This is the deserialization strategy and the deserialization module collectively make up the information required to deserialize an object. So if two queries run with the same auth UID, the same operation name, and the same variables, then they should execute in the same way and return the same results, including any exceptions that occur during deserialization. So we want to de-duplicate that work.
16:28 And then the logic to the backend, if there's already a query in progress with the same operation name, auth UID, and variables, then it should just be the results from that in-flight query should be reused.
16:49 Now one thing to note is that the SDK has a concept of sequence numbers. These are monotonically increasing numbers that are used to determine when one thing is older than another. The absolute values themselves are not meaningful, kind of like a monotonic clock.
17:06 Now if a query is executed and there's another query already in progress, then the new query must wait for that in-flight query to complete. And when it does complete, then it can run itself. But if a whole bunch of say 50 requests come in for to execute a given query, then all of the... so the first request that comes in will have the lowest sequence number, the last one will have the highest sequence number.
17:39 And the first query will execute with its sequence number and it will fan out its results to any other query requests that have an equal or lower sequence number. This makes sure that we don't get any... that we preserve the read-after-write semantics of the SDK.
18:01 So if a query is already in progress, the query that matches those three parameters, then the queries will all line up and wait for that query to complete. Then the after that query's complete, then it will be executed again with the highest enqueued sequence number. And then those results will again be fanned out to all of the enqueued requests that had an equal or lower sequence number.
18:30 This ensures that a given query is only in flight at most once to the backend and also maximizes sharing information.
18:46 If a query's executed and there is an active subscription for that query based on those three parameters, then instead of executing a new query, a resume request will be sent to the backend. And the backend will reply either with saying that the data has not changed or it will send updated data for the response.
19:08 And that data will be both sent to the subscription and returned instead of and returned to the query.
19:19 Finally, if the... suppose you have a subscription for query A and query B is executed which happens to update one of the entities that is part of the subscription's response, then the updated subscription will be or the subscription will produce an updated query results with the updated entities.
19:54 Now there'll have to be some care taken to make sure that if the cache is updated with the entities, that this doesn't clobber any server results that were received because there could be a race there where the same updates come from cache from the entity updates and from the backend.
20:18 So just to sort of recap, there's lots of de-duplication options. The first is de-duplicating what we'll call remote queries. These are queries that are actually sent to the backend that have their three defining characteristics being the auth UID, the operation name, and the query variables. Those three collectively uniquely identify a query whose request to the backend should be de-duplicated.
20:51 Either routed through the execute query RPC if there are no active subscriptions or through a resume request if there is an active subscription.
21:02 The second layer of de-duplication is what we'll call local queries. And a local query is also uniquely identified by those three pieces of information, the same three pieces of information as the remote query, but additionally de-duplicate on the data deserializer and the data deserialization module.
21:33 Okay. Oh and I guess yeah. One other thing to note although it's not particularly relevant is that the variables also have a serializer and serialization module and the local queries will be de-duplicated on the encoded variables, not the input variables.
21:58 So if two queries have the same variables and even if they have different variables but different serialization modules and everything, if they encode to the same variables, then they will be de-duplicated.
22:23 Okay. Great.
